docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md, before:

# Troubleshooting Guide

This guide helps you resolve common issues when using the Residual_Carbon biochar suitability mapping tool.

## Table of Contents

1. [Common Errors](#common-errors)
2. [Data Issues](#data-issues)
3. [Configuration Issues](#configuration-issues)
4. [Performance Issues](#performance-issues)
5. [Visualization Issues](#visualization-issues)

## Common Errors

### PermissionError: [Errno 13] Permission denied

**Problem**: Cannot write snapshot CSVs or the final suitability export during H3 conversion or scoring.

**Solution**:
- Close any programs that might have the CSV files open (Excel, text editors, etc.)
- Check file permissions on the `data/processed/` directory
- Run the script with appropriate permissions
- When automation fails mid-run, delete any partially written `.tmp` files (prefixed with `.`) so the converter can retry

### TypeError: Could not convert string to numeric

**Problem**: Non-numeric columns (like color codes) are being included in aggregation.

**Solution**:
- This has been fixed in the latest version - the code now filters to only numeric columns
- If you still see this error, check your CSV snapshots for unexpected string columns
- Ensure persisted tables only contain numeric data for soil properties

### ModuleNotFoundError

**Problem**: Missing Python packages.

**Solution**:
```bash
pip install -e .
```

Or install specific packages:
```bash
pip install earthengine-api rasterio pandas h3 folium pydeck shapely pyyaml pyarrow
```

**Note**: `pyarrow>=10.0.0` is required for DataFrame caching (Parquet file support). This is automatically installed via `requirements.txt`, but if you encounter Parquet-related errors, ensure it's installed: `pip install pyarrow>=10.0.0`.

### Config file not found

**Problem**: Configuration file cannot be loaded.

**Solution**:
- Ensure `configs/config.yaml` exists
- Run the script from the project root directory
- Use `--config` flag to specify a custom config path
- If running inside PyCharm, set the working directory to the project root (`$PROJECT_DIR$`)

## Data Issues

### No GeoTIFF files found

**Problem**: `data/raw/` directory is empty or files are missing.

**Solution**:
1. Run the acquisition tool: `python src/data/acquisition/gee_loader.py`
2. When prompted, choose how many datasets to export (0 = all), review the task summary, and start the Drive tasks
3. Wait for the exports to complete in Google Earth Engine
4. **Automatic downloads**: Once Google Drive API is configured (see SETUP_GUIDE.md Step 4), files are automatically downloaded from Google Drive to `data/raw/` as export tasks complete. No manual step required.
5. If downloads are not working automatically, re-run the acquisition tool once exports complete; it will automatically download any newly available rasters to `data/raw/`

### Final suitability CSV is empty

**Problem**: The exported `suitability_scores.csv` (or optional snapshots) contains no data.

**Solution**:
- Check that GeoTIFF files are valid and not corrupted
- Verify the clipping area intersects with the data
- Check for NoData values in the GeoTIFF files
- If your circle sits on the edge of the dataset (common near state boundaries), expect large nodata regions; this is fine as long as some valid pixels remain
- When working purely in memory, inspect the DataFrames returned from the conversion step before writing snapshots

### Suitability scores are all zero

**Problem**: All suitability scores are 0.0.

**Solution**:
- Check that thresholds file exists: `configs/thresholds.yaml`
- Verify the in-memory tables contain the required soil property columns
- Check that property values are within expected ranges
- Review threshold values in `configs/thresholds.yaml`
- Run `python -m src.analysis.thresholds` (or a quick REPL) to ensure thresholds load as expected
- Inspect the per-property score columns (`*_score`) to see which property is pulling the composite down

## Configuration Issues

### Invalid H3 resolution

**Problem**: H3 resolution is outside valid range (0-15).

**Solution**:
- Use `--h3-resolution` flag with a value between 0 and 15
- Default is 7 (recommended for most use cases)
- Higher values = finer hexagons (more detail, larger files)

### Coordinates outside Mato Grosso

**Problem**: Input coordinates are outside the state bounds.

**Solution**:
- Use coordinates within Mato Grosso bounds:
  - Latitude: -7.0 to -18.0
  - Longitude: -50.0 to -62.0
- Or omit coordinates to use the full state
- If you are unsure, run `python src/main.py` without flags; the CLI will prompt you and display the valid ranges before accepting coordinates

### Circle partially outside dataset

**Problem**: You selected coordinates near the edge of the available rasters, so the clipped output contains many NaNs.

**Solution**:
- This is expected. The verification helpers (`verify_clipping_success`, `verify_clipped_data_integrity`) already ignore nodata pixels outside the circle and only check that remaining pixels stay inside the radius.
- As long as the pipeline reports success, you can proceed; hexagons with insufficient data are skipped automatically during scoring.
- To double-check, call `verify_clipped_data_integrity` manually with the circle geometry and compare the console warnings.

## Performance Issues

### Slow processing

**Problem**: Steps take a long time to complete.

**Solution**:
- **Cache is enabled by default**: The tool automatically caches clipped rasters and DataFrame conversions. First run creates cache, subsequent runs use cache for faster processing.
- Use `--skip-steps` to skip already completed steps (if implemented)
- Reduce H3 resolution for faster processing
- Process smaller areas (use coordinates with smaller radius)
- Check if cache is being used: Look for "Using cached..." messages in the output

### Cache not working

**Problem**: Cache is not being used or cache errors occur.

**Solution**:
- **Cache is enabled by default**: Caching works automatically and requires no configuration
- **First run**: Cache is created during normal processing (this is expected)
- **Subsequent runs**: Cache is automatically used if valid (same inputs and parameters)
- **Cache validation**: Cache automatically invalidates when source files change (checks modification times)
- **Clear cache**: If you suspect cache issues, delete `data/processed/cache/` directory to force regeneration:
  ```bash
  # Windows
  rmdir /s /q data\processed\cache
  
  # Linux/Mac
  rm -rf data/processed/cache
  ```
- **Parquet errors**: Ensure `pyarrow>=10.0.0` is installed: `pip install pyarrow>=10.0.0`
- **Check cache directory**: Verify `data/processed/cache/` exists and contains cache subdirectories
- **Cache size**: Cache typically uses 10-100 MB depending on area size and number of datasets

### Large map files (>100MB)

**Problem**: HTML map files are too large.

**Solution**:
- The code automatically switches to PyDeck for large files
- Reduce H3 resolution to create smaller hexagons
- Process smaller areas
- Use lower resolution GeoTIFF files

## Visualization Issues

### Map not opening in browser

**Problem**: Auto-open fails or map doesn't display correctly.

**Solution**:
- Manually open the HTML file: `output/html/suitability_map.html`
- Check browser console for JavaScript errors
- Try a different browser
- Disable auto-open in config and open manually
- Confirm that the HTML file is under 100 MB; larger files can take a while to open on slower machines

### Map shows no data

**Problem**: Map is empty or shows only background.

**Solution**:
- Check that `suitability_scores.csv` exists and has data
- Verify the file has `lon`, `lat`, and `suitability_score` columns
- Check that scores are in valid range (0-10)
- Review the data in `data/processed/suitability_scores.csv`
- Ensure the H3 resolution you selected matches what the visualisation expects (defaults to 7)

### PYTHONPATH / import issues outside PyCharm

**Problem**: Running scripts from PowerShell or Command Prompt raises `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'src...'`.

**Solution**:
- Add the project root to your user-level `PYTHONPATH` environment variable via System Properties → Environment Variables.
- Alternatively, in PowerShell run:
  ```powershell
  [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable(
      "PYTHONPATH",
      "C:\Users\lilou\PycharmProjects\PythonProject\Residual_Carbon",
      "User"
  )
  ```
- Restart the shell so the new variable is picked up.

## Getting Help

If you encounter issues not covered here:

1. Check the log file: `logs/residual_carbon.log` (if logging is enabled)
2. Run with `--verbose` flag for detailed output
3. Check the progress file: `.progress.json` to see which steps completed
4. Review error messages and stack traces for specific error details
5. Use the verification helpers to isolate whether the issue lies in clipping, table conversion, or scoring

Commit message:

Optimize memory usage: Generate H3 boundaries only after merge and aggregation
- Remove include_boundary parameter from H3 indexing functions
- Boundaries are no longer generated during H3 indexing or merging
- Boundaries are only generated after data aggregation (99% memory reduction)
- Prevents memory crashes with large datasets (100km+ radius)
- Update documentation to reflect memory optimization
- Tested successfully with 25km and 100km radius areas

docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md, after:

# Troubleshooting Guide

This guide helps you resolve common issues when using the Residual_Carbon biochar suitability mapping tool.

## Table of Contents

1. [Common Errors](#common-errors)
2. [Data Issues](#data-issues)
3. [Configuration Issues](#configuration-issues)
4. [Performance Issues](#performance-issues)
5. [Visualization Issues](#visualization-issues)

## Common Errors

### PermissionError: [Errno 13] Permission denied

**Problem**: Cannot write snapshot CSVs or the final suitability export during H3 conversion or scoring.

**Solution**:
- Close any programs that might have the CSV files open (Excel, text editors, etc.)
- Check file permissions on the `data/processed/` directory
- Run the script with appropriate permissions
- When automation fails mid-run, delete any partially written `.tmp` files (prefixed with `.`) so the converter can retry

### TypeError: Could not convert string to numeric

**Problem**: Non-numeric columns (like color codes) are being included in aggregation.

**Solution**:
- This has been fixed in the latest version - the code now filters to only numeric columns
- If you still see this error, check your CSV snapshots for unexpected string columns
- Ensure persisted tables only contain numeric data for soil properties

### ModuleNotFoundError

**Problem**: Missing Python packages.

**Solution**:
```bash
pip install -e .
```

Or install specific packages:
```bash
pip install earthengine-api rasterio pandas h3 folium pydeck shapely pyyaml pyarrow
```

**Note**: `pyarrow>=10.0.0` is required for DataFrame caching (Parquet file support). This is automatically installed via `requirements.txt`, but if you encounter Parquet-related errors, ensure it's installed: `pip install pyarrow>=10.0.0`.

### Config file not found

**Problem**: Configuration file cannot be loaded.

**Solution**:
- Ensure `configs/config.yaml` exists
- Run the script from the project root directory
- Use `--config` flag to specify a custom config path
- If running inside PyCharm, set the working directory to the project root (`$PROJECT_DIR$`)

## Data Issues

### No GeoTIFF files found

**Problem**: `data/raw/` directory is empty or files are missing.

**Solution**:
1. Run the acquisition tool: `python src/data/acquisition/gee_loader.py`
2. When prompted, choose how many datasets to export (0 = all), review the task summary, and start the Drive tasks
3. Wait for the exports to complete in Google Earth Engine
4. **Automatic downloads**: Once Google Drive API is configured (see SETUP_GUIDE.md Step 4), files are automatically downloaded from Google Drive to `data/raw/` as export tasks complete. No manual step required.
5. If downloads are not working automatically, re-run the acquisition tool once exports complete; it will automatically download any newly available rasters to `data/raw/`

### Final suitability CSV is empty

**Problem**: The exported `suitability_scores.csv` (or optional snapshots) contains no data.

**Solution**:
- Check that GeoTIFF files are valid and not corrupted
- Verify the clipping area intersects with the data
- Check for NoData values in the GeoTIFF files
- If your circle sits on the edge of the dataset (common near state boundaries), expect large nodata regions; this is fine as long as some valid pixels remain
- When working purely in memory, inspect the DataFrames returned from the conversion step before writing snapshots

### Suitability scores are all zero

**Problem**: All suitability scores are 0.0.

**Solution**:
- Check that thresholds file exists: `configs/thresholds.yaml`
- Verify the in-memory tables contain the required soil property columns
- Check that property values are within expected ranges
- Review threshold values in `configs/thresholds.yaml`
- Run `python -m src.analysis.thresholds` (or a quick REPL) to ensure thresholds load as expected
- Inspect the per-property score columns (`*_score`) to see which property is pulling the composite down

## Configuration Issues

### Invalid H3 resolution

**Problem**: H3 resolution is outside valid range (0-15).

**Solution**:
- Use `--h3-resolution` flag with a value between 0 and 15
- Default is 7 (recommended for most use cases)
- Higher values = finer hexagons (more detail, larger files)

### Coordinates outside Mato Grosso

**Problem**: Input coordinates are outside the state bounds.

**Solution**:
- Use coordinates within Mato Grosso bounds:
  - Latitude: -7.0 to -18.0
  - Longitude: -50.0 to -62.0
- Or omit coordinates to use the full state
- If you are unsure, run `python src/main.py` without flags; the CLI will prompt you and display the valid ranges before accepting coordinates

### Circle partially outside dataset

**Problem**: You selected coordinates near the edge of the available rasters, so the clipped output contains many NaNs.

**Solution**:
- This is expected. The verification helpers (`verify_clipping_success`, `verify_clipped_data_integrity`) already ignore nodata pixels outside the circle and only check that remaining pixels stay inside the radius.
- As long as the pipeline reports success, you can proceed; hexagons with insufficient data are skipped automatically during scoring.
- To double-check, call `verify_clipped_data_integrity` manually with the circle geometry and compare the console warnings.

## Performance Issues

### Slow processing

**Problem**: Steps take a long time to complete.

**Solution**:
- **Cache is enabled by default**: The tool automatically caches clipped rasters and DataFrame conversions. First run creates cache, subsequent runs use cache for faster processing.
- Use `--skip-steps` to skip already completed steps (if implemented)
- Reduce H3 resolution for faster processing
- Process smaller areas (use coordinates with smaller radius)
- Check if cache is being used: Look for "Using cached..." messages in the output

### Memory issues or crashes

**Problem**: Application crashes or runs out of memory, especially with large datasets (100km+ radius).

**Solution**:
- **Memory optimization is built-in**: The pipeline automatically optimizes memory usage by deferring H3 boundary generation until after merge and aggregation. This reduces memory usage by ~99% for large datasets.
- **How it works**: Boundaries are not generated during H3 indexing or merging. They are only generated after data is aggregated by hexagon (e.g., 5,817 hexagons instead of 521,217 points).
- **If you still experience memory issues**:
  - Process smaller areas (reduce radius)
  - Reduce H3 resolution (coarser hexagons = fewer hexagons)
  - Ensure you're using the latest version with memory optimizations
  - Check available system memory (recommended: 4GB+ free RAM for 100km radius)

### Cache not working

**Problem**: Cache is not being used or cache errors occur.

**Solution**:
- **Cache is enabled by default**: Caching works automatically and requires no configuration
- **First run**: Cache is created during normal processing (this is expected)
- **Subsequent runs**: Cache is automatically used if valid (same inputs and parameters)
- **Cache validation**: Cache automatically invalidates when source files change (checks modification times)
- **Clear cache**: If you suspect cache issues, delete `data/processed/cache/` directory to force regeneration:
  ```bash
  # Windows
  rmdir /s /q data\processed\cache
  
  # Linux/Mac
  rm -rf data/processed/cache
  ```
- **Parquet errors**: Ensure `pyarrow>=10.0.0` is installed: `pip install pyarrow>=10.0.0`
- **Check cache directory**: Verify `data/processed/cache/` exists and contains cache subdirectories
- **Cache size**: Cache typically uses 10-100 MB depending on area size and number of datasets

### Large map files (>100MB)

**Problem**: HTML map files are too large.

**Solution**:
- The code automatically switches to PyDeck for large files
- Reduce H3 resolution to create smaller hexagons
- Process smaller areas
- Use lower resolution GeoTIFF files

## Visualization Issues

### Map not opening in browser

**Problem**: Auto-open fails or map doesn't display correctly.

**Solution**:
- Manually open the HTML file: `output/html/suitability_map.html`
- Check browser console for JavaScript errors
- Try a different browser
- Disable auto-open in config and open manually
- Confirm that the HTML file is under 100 MB; larger files can take a while to open on slower machines

### Map shows no data

**Problem**: Map is empty or shows only background.

**Solution**:
- Check that `suitability_scores.csv` exists and has data
- Verify the file has `lon`, `lat`, and `suitability_score` columns
- Check that scores are in valid range (0-10)
- Review the data in `data/processed/suitability_scores.csv`
- Ensure the H3 resolution you selected matches what the visualisation expects (defaults to 7)

### PYTHONPATH / import issues outside PyCharm

**Problem**: Running scripts from PowerShell or Command Prompt raises `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'src...'`.

**Solution**:
- Add the project root to your user-level `PYTHONPATH` environment variable via System Properties → Environment Variables.
- Alternatively, in PowerShell run:
  ```powershell
  [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable(
      "PYTHONPATH",
      "C:\Users\lilou\PycharmProjects\PythonProject\Residual_Carbon",
      "User"
  )
  ```
- Restart the shell so the new variable is picked up.

## Getting Help

If you encounter issues not covered here:

1. Check the log file: `logs/residual_carbon.log` (if logging is enabled)
2. Run with `--verbose` flag for detailed output
3. Check the progress file: `.progress.json` to see which steps completed
4. Review error messages and stack traces for specific error details
5. Use the verification helpers to isolate whether the issue lies in clipping, table conversion, or scoring
